[Music]
so here we come to the discussion about
the prompt strings
and what are the fields that you can
insert as a part of the prompt string
and
customizing them for your needs
so the context for prompt strings has
come already when we were using the bash
shell
so there are a lot of shells in the
linux operating system like the dash l
z shell k shell and c shell apart from
the bash
each of these will have a default
configuration for the
prompt
and by recognizing
the nature of that prompt you can
actually go on to
see if there is any configuration change
that you want to do
there are also other command line
utilities such as python which can be
run on the command line to
try out certain pieces of code before
you put them together in a jupyter
notebook or in a python script
so the prompt for the python are octave
which is a
matlab compatible
numerical package and language on linux
and then gnu plot which is a very
powerful
plotting tool available on linux and the
sage map which is
a symbolic computing package
which is comparable and perhaps better
than tools like mathematica or maple so
all these
languages
will have a command line
environment where the prompt can be
different
and one can also customize those
there are four bash prompts that are
configured
and what we see on the screen when we
open a bash shell is the primary prompt
which usually ends with a dollar
and then there is a secondary prompt
which is shown when we have a multi-line
input we did not close the codes and
then we need to close it by supplying
some more input so in such situations
the secondary prompt will be shown and
that is usually the greater than symbol
the third prompt string
is used when we run a bash command in a
select loop which is part of the shell
scripts that we have explored in the
past
and the fourth
prompt string
is
shown when
every command that is executed by the
bash is to be displayed on the screen
because we have used the option set
minus x which is to basically make the
execution trace so that it helps us in
debugging the scripts
now there are certain escape sequences
that you could use while configuring
the
values for these four
prompt strings
so that what is displayed on the screen
can be changed
so you could use the time in different
formats the current time
or
current time in 24 hour format with the
seconds also displayed or current time
in 12 hour format with the seconds
displayed
you could have the name of the shell
displayed the host name either up to the
first period or the complete host name
you could also have the date displayed
if you wish the current user's username
which is also default in the bachelor on
ubuntu that is displayed you can have
the current directory that is displayed
which is also part of the default
for the ubuntu bash
and then you can also have the command
line number so that you can keep track
on how many commands you are running and
you can go back to the history also
and you can also
use the
literal characters to escape the
sequence by using a backslash
so the default value of the ps1
is what is given at the bottom slash u
at slash h colon slash w
slash dollar so the meaning would be the
user name at the machine name colon
the current directory followed by
dollar symbol if the user is not super
user
in the case of python command line the
ps1 and ps2 are defined in the modules
and they can be modified as a part of
your code
and by overriding the
string function
you could actually also make it dynamic
and by default the python command line
has the command prompt which is
three greater than symbols
now let us look at a demo of this
customization
in the shell
so the first
palm string
what we have here already you can make
out that it is the username
at
the host name which is the machine name
icmb colon and then the tilde is a short
form for the home directory followed by
dollar so where i am
so i am at the home directory
and
cd tilde will bring me to the home
directory so tilde is a short form for
home directory
so
the prompt string is already have in the
home directory here so let us see
what is the value that is given per ps1
and now you see that fairly long
string is there
some of these which are coming here are
actually for the color display so you
know that it's displays in green color
so color display is shown
don't worry about those come here and
notice what is actually given so the
username at the host name is there
followed by
the
current directory and then dollar okay
so i will show you what would be the
difference if we
reconfigure the ps1 to the four
parts that we have seen just now
ps1 is equal to
slash u at slash h
colon slash w
slash dollar
okay
now you see that the color of the prompt
has changed so some of these other codes
which i mentioned here
and
here the ending so these kind of things
are all basically for color
other than that if you see the display
it is the same text which means that
this is all that actually matters for us
okay
so we can now configure it with some
more fields
and let us try that out
instead of username and host name what i
would like to do is slash t
and now you see that the time is being
displayed so if including seconds it can
be displayed as a part of the prompt
string
and instead of t i would actually use d
which gives me the date
okay so the date is matching only the
date part is actually displayed in the
prompt okay so for those who are
liking that format can be
you can choose that way so you could
also have the date and time together as
part of the prompt string
okay
and you could also have
hash
to
list what is the number of the command
okay so 44th command is currently what
is there so i put ls and then the number
changes to 45 so the next command
okay and the next command
so you could see that the number in
front of the colon is increasing which
means that this particular field
is enabling us to keep track of how many
at the command are we typing in in the
current instance of the bash okay so of
course if we have
messed up the
prompt string and we would like to
revert it back all that we need to do is
to source the bash rc
and you get back the prompt because the
prompt is defined in the bashrc so where
is it defined
you can see here
so in this paragraph you have the
bash prompt defined and therefore
whenever you have any problem
you can just
look at this particular
part make a copy of it so that you don't
lose it you can actually
comment it out and then change it to
what you want so that whenever you log
in the prompt is the way that you like
now the second command prompt
is here
so that is just a greater than symbol
so if you say like
echo
hello and i must close the
code symbol i do don't close it so you
now see that the second prompt has come
which is basically asking me to close
the
quotation symbol so i now close it and
the command is complete so i get back
the primary prompt
now i would like to change the secondary
prompt to something else
and here i can use the
field names that we have learnt just now
so i can say
hey and then user name
close the
string
okay
so now what happens is that when i try
to do the same command
the prompt would now look very different
so you see the prompt is saying hey
funny close the string
and i close it now
and now you see that the prompt is back
to the primary prompt the secondary
prompt alone we have
configured where the username field is
used
here and rest of it is what i like to
show
so you can customize as you like
now the ps3 is for the select command so
let us look at that first of all
so it doesn't display however it is
already configured
and that is something that you could
look at it here
select x in
alpha beta gamma
do
equal
dollar x
done
so now this is a select command in bash
syntax and i am now supposed to select
uh one of the three options given the
alpha beta gamma and the values are one
two three and you see the prompt is
actually hash question mark
okay
so
i can choose
1 and then it gives me the value that i
have chosen i can choose 2 it gives me
the value i have chosen
ok and if i happen to choose something
else
it does not allow that
okay
so
i can come out with ctrl c
and i can customize the ps3
ps3 is equal to i'll say
choose
choose your option
as above
okay
so that is what i want to display
so let us go ahead and run this
command again
and you see that the prompt has changed
okay so you can customize the ps3 also
okay
and come out of that now the ps4 as i
mentioned to you is for
displaying the command on the screen if
we have put set minus x option for
execution trace
so i'll put that option now
so from now on till i put the command
set plus x what happens is that every
command that i am running will be first
printed out on the screen and then the
command will be run
so
you see that plus pwd and then the
command has been run and the output is
home gpa
date
so the command is again displayed plus
date and then the date command output is
coming up so the prompt
string for
this output is basically plus character
okay so we can now change that
ps4 is equal to
and then i can give a string i can say
now
running command
okay so i can now change it that way
so if i now start typing
you can see that the prompt has changed
from plus symbol it has now changed to
now i'm running command cola which means
that the ps4 has been customized
okay so all the four prompt strings in
bash can be customized
now what are the other prompt strings
that we came across python is one such
thing so let us see what is the
prompt string in the case of python and
you can see it is basically
three symbols of three greater than
symbols side by side that is the
prom string
okay so
i come out of that
octave is a tool i mentioned to you
which is a very powerful language with
the syntax compatible with matlab
so
that is also available as a command line
utility so you could do
things that are quite complicated
creating an array from 1 200
creating array with the hops of 10
and making a plot
which came on the other window okay so
this is a language and the prompt for
octave seems to be that it is a string
octave followed by a colon and then the
number which represents the command line
sequence that we are entering
so there is another two called gnu plot
which is also having the command line
you can see that the prompt is gnu plot
sage is a symbolic computational
package
it's a language very powerful
and
it's also available on command line as
well as as a jupiter notebook the prompt
is ch colon
so the plot was
coming on the other window okay
so quite
so
so that's about the command prompts and
how to customize in bash and also
command prompts in
other command line environments
that we have seen till now